README.md, before:

# EnzymeML-TS

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/enzymeml.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/js/enzymeml)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

The **official TypeScript library** for [EnzymeML](https://enzymeml.org), providing comprehensive type definitions and runtime validation for enzymatic experiment data.

## Overview

EnzymeML is a standardized data exchange format that supports the comprehensive documentation of enzymatic data by describing reaction conditions, time courses of substrate and product concentrations, kinetic models, and estimated kinetic constants. This TypeScript library provides:

- 🔒 **Type-safe** data structures based on EnzymeML v2 specification
- ⚡ **Runtime validation** using [Zod](https://github.com/colinhacks/zod)
- 📝 **Complete type inference** for excellent IDE support
- 🌐 **JSON-LD compatible** for semantic web applications

## Installation

In order to use this library, you need to install it in your project. You can do this using NPM or Yarn.

```bash
# Using NPM
npm install enzymeml

# Using Yarn
yarn add enzymeml
```

## Usage

There are two ways of using this library. First, you can use the `EnzymeMLDocumentSchema` or any of the sub-schemas to validate your dataset against the EnzymeML V2 specification through the usage of Zod. Second, you can use the `EnzymeMLDocument` or any of the sub-types in your web-application to provide a type-safe interface for your users.

### Validation

The following example shows how to validate a dataset against the EnzymeML V2 specification using Zod.

```typescript
import { EnzymeMLDocumentSchema } from 'enzymeml';

const data = {
    "version": "2.0.0",
    "description": "This is a test EnzymeML document",
    "name": "Test EnzymeML Document",
    "small_molecules": [
        {
            "id": "s1",
            "name": "Small Molecule 1",
            "canonical_smiles": "C1=CC=C(C=C1)C(=O)O"
        }
    ]
}

const result = EnzymeMLDocumentSchema.parse(data);

if (!result.success) {
    console.error(result.error);
}
```

### Fetchers

The library provides both direct fetchers and search capabilities for the following sources:

- [ChEBI](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/)
- [PDB](https://www.rcsb.org/)
- [UniProt](https://www.uniprot.org/)
- [Rhea](https://www.rhea-db.org/)
- [PubChem](https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)

```typescript
import { fetchRhea, fetchPdb, fetchPubChem, searchChebi } from 'enzymeml';

const enzmldoc: EnzymeMLDocument = {
    ... // Your EnzymeML document
}

// Fetch specific entries by ID
const [reaction, smallMolecules] = await fetchRhea('RHEA:13065');
const protein = await fetchPdb('PDB:1LYZ');
const smallMolecule = await fetchPubChem('ethanol');

// Search for entries by name
const glucoseResults = await searchChebi('glucose', 10);

enzmldoc.reactions.push(reaction);
enzmldoc.small_molecules.push(...smallMolecules, ...glucoseResults);
enzmldoc.proteins.push(protein);
```

### LLM Integration

The library includes OpenAI streaming utilities for AI-powered data generation and analysis:

```typescript
import { extractData, EnzymeMLDocumentSchema } from 'enzymeml';

// Generate structured EnzymeML documents with AI
const { chunks, final } = extractData({
  model: 'gpt-4',
  input: [{ role: 'user', content: 'Create an EnzymeML document for glucose metabolism' }],
  schema: EnzymeMLDocumentSchema,
  schemaKey: 'enzymeml_document'
});

// Stream the response
for await (const chunk of chunks) {
  if (chunk.kind === 'text') {
    console.log(chunk.delta);
  }
}

// Get the final validated document
const document = await final;
```

### Type-safe interface

The following example shows how to use the `EnzymeMLDocument` type to create a type-safe interface for your users.

```typescript
import { EnzymeMLDocument, SmallMolecule } from 'enzymeml';

const myFunction = (data: EnzymeMLDocument): SmallMolecule => {
    const smallMolecule = data.small_molecules.find((smallMolecule) => smallMolecule.id === 's1');
    if (!smallMolecule) {
        throw new Error('Small molecule not found');
    }
    return smallMolecule;
}
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit an issue or a pull request.

---

<div align="center">
<strong>Made with ❤️ by the EnzymeML Team</strong>
</div>

Commit message:

Add OpenAI streaming utilities to features list
Updated the README to mention new OpenAI streaming utilities for AI-powered data extraction using the OpenAI API.

README.md, after:

# EnzymeML-TS

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/enzymeml.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/js/enzymeml)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

The **official TypeScript library** for [EnzymeML](https://enzymeml.org), providing comprehensive type definitions and runtime validation for enzymatic experiment data.

## Overview

EnzymeML is a standardized data exchange format that supports the comprehensive documentation of enzymatic data by describing reaction conditions, time courses of substrate and product concentrations, kinetic models, and estimated kinetic constants. This TypeScript library provides:

- 🔒 **Type-safe** data structures based on EnzymeML v2 specification
- ⚡ **Runtime validation** using [Zod](https://github.com/colinhacks/zod)
- 📝 **Complete type inference** for excellent IDE support
- 🌐 **JSON-LD compatible** for semantic web applications
- 🔍 **OpenAI streaming utilities** for AI-powered data extraction from text and files using the OpenAI API

## Installation

In order to use this library, you need to install it in your project. You can do this using NPM or Yarn.

```bash
# Using NPM
npm install enzymeml

# Using Yarn
yarn add enzymeml
```

## Usage

There are two ways of using this library. First, you can use the `EnzymeMLDocumentSchema` or any of the sub-schemas to validate your dataset against the EnzymeML V2 specification through the usage of Zod. Second, you can use the `EnzymeMLDocument` or any of the sub-types in your web-application to provide a type-safe interface for your users.

### Validation

The following example shows how to validate a dataset against the EnzymeML V2 specification using Zod.

```typescript
import { EnzymeMLDocumentSchema } from 'enzymeml';

const data = {
    "version": "2.0.0",
    "description": "This is a test EnzymeML document",
    "name": "Test EnzymeML Document",
    "small_molecules": [
        {
            "id": "s1",
            "name": "Small Molecule 1",
            "canonical_smiles": "C1=CC=C(C=C1)C(=O)O"
        }
    ]
}

const result = EnzymeMLDocumentSchema.parse(data);

if (!result.success) {
    console.error(result.error);
}
```

### Fetchers

The library provides both direct fetchers and search capabilities for the following sources:

- [ChEBI](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/)
- [PDB](https://www.rcsb.org/)
- [UniProt](https://www.uniprot.org/)
- [Rhea](https://www.rhea-db.org/)
- [PubChem](https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)

```typescript
import { fetchRhea, fetchPdb, fetchPubChem, searchChebi } from 'enzymeml';

const enzmldoc: EnzymeMLDocument = {
    ... // Your EnzymeML document
}

// Fetch specific entries by ID
const [reaction, smallMolecules] = await fetchRhea('RHEA:13065');
const protein = await fetchPdb('PDB:1LYZ');
const smallMolecule = await fetchPubChem('ethanol');

// Search for entries by name
const glucoseResults = await searchChebi('glucose', 10);

enzmldoc.reactions.push(reaction);
enzmldoc.small_molecules.push(...smallMolecules, ...glucoseResults);
enzmldoc.proteins.push(protein);
```

### LLM Integration

The library includes OpenAI streaming utilities for AI-powered data generation and analysis:

```typescript
import { extractData, EnzymeMLDocumentSchema } from 'enzymeml';

// Generate structured EnzymeML documents with AI
const { chunks, final } = extractData({
  model: 'gpt-4',
  input: [{ role: 'user', content: 'Create an EnzymeML document for glucose metabolism' }],
  schema: EnzymeMLDocumentSchema,
  schemaKey: 'enzymeml_document'
});

// Stream the response
for await (const chunk of chunks) {
  if (chunk.kind === 'text') {
    console.log(chunk.delta);
  }
}

// Get the final validated document
const document = await final;
```

### Type-safe interface

The following example shows how to use the `EnzymeMLDocument` type to create a type-safe interface for your users.

```typescript
import { EnzymeMLDocument, SmallMolecule } from 'enzymeml';

const myFunction = (data: EnzymeMLDocument): SmallMolecule => {
    const smallMolecule = data.small_molecules.find((smallMolecule) => smallMolecule.id === 's1');
    if (!smallMolecule) {
        throw new Error('Small molecule not found');
    }
    return smallMolecule;
}
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit an issue or a pull request.

---

<div align="center">
<strong>Made with ❤️ by the EnzymeML Team</strong>
</div>
